Types of Banks in India

1) Central Bank
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) serves as the Central Bank of India and is responsible for regulating and controlling the monetary and banking system in the country.

2) Commercial Banks
These are the most common types of banks and include public sector banks, private sector banks, and foreign banks. They provide various services like savings and current accounts, loans, and investments.

Owned and operated by the government, examples include State Bank of India (SBI), Punjab National Bank (PNB), and Bank of Baroda (BOB).
 These are privately owned and managed banks, such as HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank, and Axis Bank.
These banks have branches in India and are headquartered in foreign countries. Some examples are Citibank, Standard Chartered, and HSBC.
 These banks cater to rural and semi-urban areas and are owned by the government, commercial banks, and state governments.
The table below shows a few examples of Commercial Banks in India.


3) Cooperative Banks
A Co-operative Bank is registered under the Co-operative Societies Act of 1912 and is run by an elected managing committee. It works on a non-profit, no-loss basis and mainly serves entrepreneurs, small businesses, self-employment, and more in urban areas.

4) Payment Banks
The payment banks are a relatively new banking model in the country that has been conceptualised by the RBI. This bank is allowed to accept a restricted deposit. This amount is limited to Rs. 1 lakh for a customer. The bank also offers services such as ATM cards, net banking and more.

5) Small Finance Banks
These banks primarily serve the unserved and underserved sections of the population, including small businesses and low-income individuals.

This type of bank is licensed under Section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act 1949, and it is governed by the Provisions Act of 1934.

6) Scheduled Banks
These banks are covered under the 2nd Schedule of RBI Act 1934, and they need to have a paid-up capital of Rs. 5 lahks or more.

7) Non-Scheduled Banks
The non-scheduled banks are local area banks that are not listed in the 2nd Schedule of the RBI Act 1934.